(theme music)
So even if you're not building a website
that is built on this, like, very strict grid,
it might even just be that your grid is one column-wide
and maybe two rows-high,
it's extremely handy to use CSS Grid for centering things.
And we all know the jokes of how hard it is
to center things in CSS.
Well, Flexbox has fixed most of that.
And I think it's even easier in Grid to
to center all of your items.
So let's actually first take a look at
all the different properties.
We actually have six properties that come along with
being able to align things in Grid.
We've got justify-items and align-items.
Then we've got justify-content and align-content.
And then we have align-self and justify-self.
So really, the way to understand,
I think most people are just sorta,
try one and if it's the wrong one that they're looking for,
they go for the other one.
The way to remember it is that the justify ones are
along the x-axis or the row axis.
And the align items are along the column axis,
so top to bottom, and unlike Flexbox,
they don't switch, so you don't have to, like,
sorta, like, remember where's my axis going.
So let's start off
and what I recommend for doing this is
not to come back to this video every single time,
but the CSS Tricks article has some really nifty here,
these little articles, or these little images
will show you sorta what each of them do
and what all the different properties do.
So let's start you off here.
I've actually made you a bunch of different items here
and I've given them a class of itm.
Not item, just because I don't want the
the styling that I've given you as base styling
in the style.css to
to play into our understanding of how this works.
So first thing we wanna do is,
let's go through the first one,
the justify-items and align-items.
So this is the actual items themselves.
That's these divs or whatever the direct children are
of the container.
So let's go into here.
And actually, let's first put some color on it.
So itm, give it a background of white.
Good, so we see how all of our items are.
And we'll just go back up to our container
and justify-items.
And let's say center.
So what will that do?
Woo, so the default of justify-items is stretch
and that will stretch them across
the entire actual grid that we have.
So here we are, this is the grid, it goes that far.
But if we change that to center,
you'll see that the actual item itself
is only as wide as it needs to be.
So if I were to take one of these and
add something like Wes is Cool,
you'll see that that is only as large as
it actually needs to be.
If it did, if it went a little bit longer than that,
you will see that it would indeed take up
the entire width of the grid.
But in our case, since we're just using some numbers here
or Wes is Cool, it's only going to
go as wide as the actual content is.
So we similarly have start,
which will bring you to the start.
And we have end, which will bring you to the end.
You can also interchange those with flex-start as well
and flex-end, because those were the values for Flexbox,
but I think it makes more sense just to use start and end.
We had stretch, let's see what else we got here.
What, we're at justify-items.
Start, end, center, and stretch.
So those are all the four possible options
that you have there.
Again, justify is along the x-axis
and then the align
items
and that is,
let's say start, see if that does any different.
No, it doesn't, and that's because our rows
don't have any height to them.
So if we were to go into here and say grid-template-rows,
and repeat, I don't know,
five at 100px
high,
you'll see that now our rows are 100 pixels high.
And if we were to align them at the start,
then they are at the top.
Obviously, the end would go to the end.
The center will go to the center.
And the stretch will stretch them all the way across.
So if you did wanna perfectly center something,
it is as simple as just saying, center center,
and that would center exactly inside of that item.
So super easy.
Even easier, you can use the sort of CSS shorthand
that we've got now,
which is just called place-items,
and say center center.
And that will do your justify and your align in a single go.
What is it yelling at me about here?
Unknown property?
Well, we're at cutting edge here at VS Code and
I know about it.
So you do wanna be careful about browser support for this.
What I would recommend doing if you are using place-items
is to make sure that your autoprefixer will turn
your place-items into the equivalent justify and align.
Let's do a little inspect element, open this up.
See if you open up your place-items,
you can see that it is just shorthand
for these other two properties that we have.
So again, justify on the x-axis, align on the y-axis.
Anytime we're talking about items,
we're talking about the actual items themselves.
Now let's flip over to the align-self and the justify-self.
So.
Oh sorry, let's flip over to the justify-content
and the align-content.
So we'll go over here.
Let's look at what Mr. Coyier has to say about this.
Justify
content.
Here we go.
So the justify-content.
If the grid is not as wide as we could possibly want,
so in our case, we're using fr units
and since it's gonna go all the way across.
But if I were to change this to
let's say, 100px,
it actually, oh, maybe it's gotta go,
maybe we should just have five items.
There we go, so now our grid, if we put a border around it,
you see our grid is this wide,
but I only have five columns that are 100px each,
so I've got all this extra space.
And what do we do with that extra space?
That is what justify-content and align-content answers.
So again, justify is on the x-axis.
Let's take a look at how that works.
So I say, justify-content and I think start is the default.
Yup, again we can do end, we can do center.
And you see how it's centering itself.
And then the probably two most helpful ones
and these are mirrored in Flexbox is
space-around
and what that will do is
it will take each of our items.
So here, let me, let's bring our,
this back to stretch.
Stretch, so we can visualize a little easier.
There we go.
And then it'll take the extra space and
put it in between each of the values that you have.
And now you may be wondering like,
why is this not as big as this,
and that's because space-around will take
all of the extra space and evenly divide it
on either side of your column.
So if you would not like these sorta side line things here,
we just say space-between,
and that will nix the left and the right,
which is almost always what you want
when you're trying to perfectly align your values.
And it'll just take the extra space and put it
in between each one.
So now if I made this 130 or something like that,
there's a little bit less space,
but it will still put it evenly in between that.
So again, if you have extra space in your grid,
meaning that your container is wider than
your grid needs to be, because you've used
a hard pixel value or a rem or em value,
not a fr unit or percentages,
then you can use justify-content to tell it
where those items tend to go.
Similarly, if your grid has an actual height on it.
So now let's get rid of some of these.
Let's just bring it down to 10 items.
And
let's say that,
in this case, we don't need all these template rows either.
Let's get rid of that.
There we go.
But if our container had a hard height on it, like 500px,
what's going to happen and by default,
these items are stretching, right,
we know how stretch is the default.
But we can align-content,
we can say center,
and that will center them.
We can say start and that would put them at the top.
End.
And then similarly, space-around will put them around
and space-between will do that.
I don't run into that all that often,
just because a fixed height on a grid is not as common as
a width on
on a grid, but it's good to know.
Again, align is the vertical axis,
justify is the horizontal axis.
Good, and then finally, we've got these last two,
which is align-self and justify-self.
And what that allows us to do is to override each of those
on a case-by-case basis, rather than
a single basis.
So let's take item one, two, three, four,
let's take item five.
And this would be on the item itself.
And we could just do something like,
let's say we wanna to do it along the x-axis,
that's justify, so justify-self,
and we can just say center.
Oh, you have to spell it right for it to work.
There we go, so you see how all of these are stretch,
but I can override it on a case-by-case basis
with the ability to justify-self.
And align-self works exactly the same way.
If I were to center that,
then it's gonna pop it down center.
And why is that not working?
Well, we actually don't have any height
on this actual element, but if I did,
it would perfectly center itself.
So good to put those in your back pocket.
I try to think of some sorta silly way to remember that
justify is on the x or the row-axis,
and align is on the y or the vertical or the column axis.
But
after a while, you tend to remember it.
Or just bookmark this little page and
look at the items there.
So we got a bunch of more examples coming up on
when we can use that.
And myself, I actually use this quite a bit
just to center text inside of actual elements.
And again, if you look back at the style.css,
which is our base style, you'll notice that
on each of the items, I have just displayed grid
and I haven't given it any columns or rows or anything,
but this little ditty right here will display grid,
justify content center, align items center.
That's a great way just to take whatever is in an element,
might just be a paragraph tag, might be raw text,
might a couple of paragraph tags,
and just perfectly center it without having to
to really worry about it.
You can also do this with Flexbox
but I actually think I prefer to do it in Grid,
just because of the ability to both do
justify-self and align-self.
Whereas with Flexbox, you can only do align-self.
There is no justify-self in Flexbox,
which is a bit of a bummer.
Maybe it'll come back in a revision to the Flexbox set,
but I'm pretty happy with that.
All right, let's move on to the next one.
We're almost done, our fundamentals,
and then we're gonna dive into some real-world examples.